## National Context

### National circumstances
**Environment:** Malawi’s landscape has a varied topography and is dominated by the Great Rift Valley, which runs north to south and contains Lake Malawi and the Shire River Valley. To the west are the central plateaus, highlands (Nyika and Viphya in the north and Shire in the south) and isolated mountains (Mulanje and Zomba) (USAID, 2017a). In the mountainous sections of Malawi surrounding the Rift Valley, plateaus rise generally 800m to 1,200m above sea level, with some especially in the north rising as high as 3,000m. To the south of Lake Malawi lie the Shire Highlands, approximately 900m above sea level. The Shire River plays a very significant role in Malawi by providing water for generating hydropower (98% of Malawi’s electricity), agriculture, fisheries, transport, tourism, urban and rural water supply along its length, impacting the livelihoods of over 5.5 million people in the southern region of Malawi (Masi, 2017). Freshwater for irrigation in Malawi’s plantations such as Illovo Sugar at Nchalo is obtained from the Shire River; as well as other domestic and industrial uses (UNFCC, 2006). Malawi has multiple important waterbodies including Lake Malawi, (the third largest African Rift Valley Lake), Lakes Malombe, Lake Chilwa, and Lake Chiuta(USAID, 2015). Other rivers in Malawi providing water comprise of North and South Rukuru and Songwe in the Northern Region, Linthipe, Bua and Dwangwa in the Central Region, and Shire and Ruo in the Southern Region (Global Water Partnership, 2016).

In 2005, forest area coverage was at 24.3% while cultivated land covered 33.7%, shrubs and savanna woodlands covered 19.9% and the remaining 22.1% of Malawi was 
covered by water. In the upper Shire River catchment, there was an 18 % increase in agricultural land in the 1989 to 2002 period (Mtilatila et al. 2020). Forests 
and trees impacts livelihoods and the economy through the supply of biomass fuels, provision of habitats for wildlife and biodiversity, prevention of land 
degradation, protection of watersheds and acts as sources of soil fertility (Hughes et al. 2019). Malawi has the highest deforestation rate in sub-Saharan Africa 
with the government of Malawi estimating that the annual rate of deforestation in Malawi is 1.0–2.8%. Estimation shows that the ratio of forest area decreased from 51% to 33% from 1990 to 2010 (Mapulanga and Naito, 2019). Malawi has very low greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions of around 1.4 tons CO2 equivalents (CO2e) per capita in 2015 by global standards (Hughes et al. 2019). According to Malawi’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC), the main sectors contributing to GHG emissions are as at 2015, forestry at 78% of the emissions, agriculture at 16% and energy at 4% (Irish Aid, 2018).

Soil degradation is a major challenge with soil losses averaged at 20 T/ha/year. This translate in a yield loss of 4% - 25% annually (Irish Aid 2019). In 2014, the average annual national soil loss rates were estimated at 29 tons per hectare, and soil erosion and nutrient depletion are reported to affect more than 60% of Malawi’s land area. The main causes of this degradation are unsustainable farming practices, increasing demand for agricultural land and wood fuels associated with a growing population. Chemical land degradation, including soil pollution and salinization/ alkalization, has led to 15% loss in the arable land in Malawi in the last decade alone. The annual costs of land degradation between 2001 and 2009 have been estimated at USD 244 million per year-an amount equivalent to 6.8% of Malawi’s country’s GDP. Between 2008 and 2016, urban household demand for charcoal increased by 35% and was worth more than USD 66 million in 2016 and provided employment opportunities for over 235,000 people (Hughes et al. 2019).

**Climate:** The majority of the country experiences a cool tropical continental climate, characterized by two distinct seasons: a rainy season from November to 
April and a dry season from May to October. Annual rainfall ranges from 500 mm in low-lying areas such as the Shire Valley to above 3,000 mm in the northern 
highlands. Overall rainfall exhibits high inter-annual variability and is highly influenced by the El Niño Southern Oscillation (USAID, 2017a). The rains can 
start as early as October, especially in the south of the country and can end as late as May, especially in the north of the country (Malawi, 2015). The warm-wet 
season stretches from November to April, during which 95% of the annual precipitation takes place. Malawi experiences large heterogeneity in rainfall regime, and 
there are big differences between the North, Central and South regions. Annual average rainfall varies from 725mm to 2,500mm with Lilongwe having an average of 
900mm, Blantyre 1,127mm, Mzuzu 1,289mm and Zomba 1,433mm (Masi, 2017). In the south of Malawi, the wet season normally lasts from November to February bringing 
around 150‐300m per month, but rain continues into March and April in the north of the country as the ITCZ migrates northwards. Inter‐annual variability in the 
wet‐season rainfall in Malawi is also strongly influenced by Indian Ocean Sea Surface Temperatures, which can vary from one year to another due to variations in 
patterns of atmospheric and oceanic circulation. The most well documented cause of this variability is the El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO) (UNDP, n.d.).

Average daily temperatures vary with seasons and elevation, with the coldest temperatures (12–15°C) in July in the highlands and the hottest (25–26°C) in October 
in the Lower Shire Valley (USAID 2017a). Mean annual temperature has increased by 0.9°C between 1960 and 2006, an average rate of 0.21°C per decade (Irish Aid 
2018). A cool, dry winter season runs from May to August with mean daytime temperatures varying between 17 and 27°C, and temperatures falling between 4 and 10°C 
at night. A hot, dry season lasts from September to October with daytime temperatures between 25 and 37°C. The wet season generally occurs between November 
and April and the dry season between May and October. Average temperatures range between 18° and 27°C, and the wet season can bring average monthly rainfall in 
the order of 150mm to 300mm (Masi, 2017; UNDP, n.d.). Between 1967 and 2003, the country experienced six major droughts and incidences of flooding. 2011-12 
droughts had severe effects on food security in many districts in Malawi, with approximately 2 million people affected, particularly in the southern districts. 
(Irish Aid, 2018). Floods in Malawi have been associated with heavy upstream rainfall resulting in too much water downstream that leads to the breaking-up of 
river banks. This is a common feature on the North Rukuru in Karonga, Likangala in Zomba, and the Ruo/Shire Rivers in Chikwawa/NsanjeMalawi has also experienced 
flush floods due to prolonged torrential rains, such as the Phalombe flush floods in 1991 that killed over 1,000 people, and wiped out villages, crops, livestock 
and property (UNFCC, 2006). Intensive flooding in 2015 left many lives and livelihoods destroyed (Irish Aid, 2018).

**Political context:** The Republic of Malawi is a sovereign State with rights and obligations under the Law of Nations (Malawi Constitution, Chapter one). There 
shall be a President of the Republic who shall be Head of State and Government and the Commander-in-Chief of the Defense Forces of Malawi (Article 78). The 
President shall be elected by a majority of the electorate through direct, universal and equal suffrage (Article 80(2)). The National Assembly of Malawi is the 
supreme legislative body of the nation. The National Assembly has 193 Members of Parliament (MPs) who are directly elected in single-member constituencies using 
the simple majority system and serve five-year terms. Malawi is a member of the United Nations, the Commonwealth of Nations, the Southern African Development 
Community (SADC) (Malawi 2017), the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA), and the African Union (AU). Malawi was a one party state since 
attaining her independence until 1993 when it became a multi-party state (Masi, 2017).

**Legislative context:** The GoM prioritizes climate change, natural resources, and environmental management in its development strategy, the Malawi Growth and 
Development Strategy (MGDS II 2012–2016). The GoM has also invested in the Green Belt Initiative (GBI); an initiative which seeks to transform Malawi, through 
irrigation, from a predominantly consuming and importing country to a producing and exporting country (USAID, 2013). In 2016, Malawi made an ambitious 4.5 
million hectares restoration pledge to the Bonn Challenge and the African Forest Landscape Restoration Initiative (AFR100) by 2030 estimated at a cost of 
approximately 279 billion MWK or approximately 62000 MWK per hectare (USAID,2017b). GoM in partnership with the World Bank and African Development Bank has 
formulated this Strategic Program for Climate Resilience (SPCR) under the Pilot Programme for Climate Resilience (PPCR) to act as a framework for addressing the 
challenges of climate change that impact on the national economy and community livelihoods. The SPCR will build on the available enabling frameworks and efforts 
in climate resilience-building programs as stipulated in the Malawi Growth and Development Strategy III, National Climate Change Management Policy (2016), 
National Agriculture Policy (2016), National Climate Change Investment Plan (2013), and Malawi’s Nationally Determined Contribution under the UNFCCC (2015).

Malawi is a signatory to various international treaties, instruments and that cover climate change. These include the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the Kyoto Protocol. These treaties and instruments oblige the country to take various actions to address climate challenges including 
putting in place instruments such as climate change policies and legislation. Malawi is a member of the Least Developed Countries’ (LDCs) Group, the LDC Expert 
Group (LEG), and currently has a seat on the board of the Adaptation Committee and the Green Climate Fund (GCF) Board (Masi, 2017). The Government has put in 
place a series of legislative sectoral frameworks and strategies to integrate environment and climate change management in socio-economic development activities. 
Key ones include: Vision 2020; the Malawi Growth and Development Strategies; National Environmental Policy (NEP) 2004; NAPA 2007; National Climate Change 
Investment Plan (2013); Malawi Energy Policy (2003); Food Security Policy (2006); Disaster Preparedness and Relief Act (DPRA) (1991); Environment Management Act 
(1996) and the Disaster Risk Management Policy 2015 (Irish Aid, 2018).

**Social context:** According to the World Population review, January 2018, Malawi has a land area of 118,484 square kilometers, with an estimated population of 
18,921,352 million which ranks 61st in the world. Malawi still has a fairly low population density of 129 people per square kilometer (86th in the world). 
However, Malawi is growing rapidly with a 3.06% (Masi, 2017) annual growth rate. High incidences of poverty, violence, unemployment, malnutrition, HIV and AIDS, 
high illiteracy rates, abuse, poor health, and psychological disorders characterize the country’s young population (MDGS II 2011-2016) (Irish Aid, 2018). About 
85% of the people live in rural areas and derive their livelihoods from natural resources and agriculture (from small land holdings of between 1.0 and 5.0 ha per 
household of five people), with the remaining 15% residing in urban areas. About 48% of the population is below 15 years of age. The overall average life 
expectancy as of 2008 statistics was 37 years with fertility rates declining from 7.6 in 1984 to 2.8% in 2008 and later rising to 6.7 (Malawi Vision 2020). There 
has been migration from rural to urban areas (at the rate of 3.6% per year), and from densely populated to sparsely populated areas or districts over the decades 
from areas adversely affected by climatic hazards (especially floods and drought) to safer upland areas or other districts (Ministry of Environment and Climate 
Change Management Environmental Affairs Department, 2018) and in search of income earning opportunities (Malawi Vision 2020). 33150 cases and 981 deaths were 
recorded in Malawi’s worst Cholera outbreak. Waterborne infectious diseases are a leading cause of child mortality and contribute to forms of growth retardation, 
including stunting and wasting with 48 to 53 percent of children under the age of five suffering from stunted growth (Republic of Malawi, 2012). Overall, records 
as to disaster damage provided by Department of Disaster Management Affairs, DoDMA and the Prevention Web (by The United Nations Office for Disaster Risk 
Reduction, UNISDR) give critical information related to human and economic losses resulting from the disasters that have occurred in Malawi within last three 
decades. More than 47 natural disasters were recorded in the last three decades and these disasters range from droughts, earthquakes, epidemics, floods and 
storms. In these natural disasters, a total of 2,775 people were killed with an average of 90 people killed per year. Most of these (60%) died due to epidemics 
(National Water Resources Masterplan- Part II masterplan). Malaria is the most common disease in the lake areas, followed by respiratory infections, diarrhea, 
anemia, and bilharzia/schistosomiasis. HIV/AIDS and other sexually transmitted infections (STIs) are also common. Research conducted by Madsen et al. between 
1998 and 2007 found a high prevalence of schistosomiasis.
